PEP 622: New intro (#1500)
python/peps: pep-0622.rst

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to add a pattern matching statement to Python,
inspired by similar syntax found in Scala and many other languages.

The pattern syntax builds on Python’s existing syntax for sequence
unpacking (e.g., ``a, b = value``), but is wrapped in a ``match``
statement which compares its subject to several different “shapes”
until one is found that fits. In addition to specifying the shape of a
sequence to be unpacked, patterns can also specify the shape to be a

> mapping with specific keys, an instance of a given class with specific

Reviewer: You don't mention matching by types.

Author: ```suggestion
mapping with specific keys, an instance of a given class with (optionally) specific
```

attributes, a specific value, or a wildcard. Patterns can be composed
in several ways.

Syntactically, a ``match`` statement contains a *subject* expression
and one or more ``case`` clauses, where each case clause specifies a
pattern (the overall shape to be matched), an optional “guard” (a
condition to be checked if the pattern matches), and a code block to
be executed if the case clause is selected.

The rest of the PEP motivates why we believe pattern matching makes a
good addition to Python, explains our design choices, and contains a
precise syntactic and runtime specification. We also give guidance for
static type checkers (and one small addition to the ``typing`` module)
and discuss the main objections and alternatives that have been
brought up during extensive discussion of the proposal, both within
the group of authors and in the python-dev community. Finally, we
discuss some possible extensions that might be considered in the
future, once the community has ample experience with the currently
proposed syntax and semantics.

Overview
========

> Since patterns are a new syntactical category, with their own rules
> and exceptions, and since they mix input (given values) and output

Reviewer 2: To reduce confusion with capital-E Exceptions:

```suggestion
Since patterns are a new syntactical category with their own rules
and limitations, and since they mix input (given values) and output
```

Reviewer 3: "special cases" maybe?

Author: ```suggestion
Since patterns are a new syntactical category, with their own rules
and special cases, and since they mix input (given values) and output
```

> and exceptions, and since they mix input (given values) and output

Author: ```suggestion
and special cases, and since they mix input (given values) and output
```

(captured variables) in novel ways, they require a bit of getting used
to. It is the experience of the authors that this happens quickly when
a brief introduction to the basic concepts such as the following is
presented. Note that this section is not intended to be complete or
perfectly accurate.

A new syntactic construct called *pattern* is

> introduced. Syntactically patterns look like a subset of expressions;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
introduced. Syntactically, patterns look like a subset of expressions;
```

the following are patterns:

- ``[first, second, *rest]``
- ``Point2d(x, 0)``
- ``{"name": "Bruce", "age": age}``
- ``42``

The above look like examples of object construction. A constructor
takes some values as parameters and builds an object from those
components. But as a pattern the above mean the inverse operation of

> construction which we call *destructuring*: it takes a subject object

Reviewer 2: "subject object"

```suggestion
construction, which we call *destructuring*: it takes a subject
```

Reviewer: Or possibly 'subject value'.

Author: ```suggestion
construction, which we call *destructuring*: it takes a subject value
```

and extracts its components. The syntactic similarity between
construction and destructuring is intentional and follows the existing
Pythonic style which makes assignment targets (write contexts) look
like expressions (read contexts). Pattern matching never creates
objects, in the same way that ``[a, b] = my_list`` doesn't create a
new ``[a, b]`` list, nor reads the values of ``a`` and ``b``.

> The intuition we are trying to build in users as they learn this is
> that matching a pattern to a subject binds the free variables (if any)
> to subject components in a way that would result in the original
> subject if the pattern was read as an expression. During this process,

Reviewer 2: I don't want to confuse people into thinking they're *always* equivalent. This is clearer to me:

```suggestion
The intuition we are trying to build in users as they learn this is
that matching a pattern to a subject binds the free variables (if any)
to subject components in a way that reflects the original
subject when read as an expression. During this process,
```

the structure of the pattern may not fit the subject, in which case

> the matching *fails*. For example matching the pattern ``Point2d(x,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the matching *fails*. For example, matching the pattern ``Point2d(x,
```

0)`` to the subject ``Point2d(3, 0)`` successfully matches and binds
``x`` to ``3``. However, if the subject is ``[3, 0]`` the match fails
because a ``list`` is not a ``Point2d``. And if the subject is
``Point2D(3, 3)`` the match fails because its second coordinate is not
``0``.

The ``match`` statement tries to match each of the
patterns in its ``case`` clauses with a single subject. At the first
successful match, the variables in the pattern are assigned and a
corresponding block is executed. Each of the multiple branches of this
conditional statement can also have a boolean condition as a *guard*.

Here's an example of a match statement, used to define a function
building 3D points that can accept as input either tuples of size 2 or
3, or existing (2D or 3D) points::

    def make_point_3d(pt):
        match pt:

>             case (x, y): return Point3d(x, y, 0)
>             case (x, y, z): return Point3d(x, y, z)
>             case Point2d(x, y): return Point3d(x, y, 0)
>             case Point3d(_, _, _): return pt
>             case _: raise TypeError("not a point we support")

Reviewer 2: I find the indented variants more readable in all but the most trivial cases:

```suggestion
            case (x, y):
                return Point3d(x, y, 0)
            case (x, y, z):
                return Point3d(x, y, z)
            case Point2d(x, y):
                return Point3d(x, y, 0)
            case Point3d(_, _, _):
                return pt
            case _:
                raise TypeError("not a point we support")
```

Writing this function in the traditional fashion would require several
``isinstance()`` checks, one or two ``len()`` calls, and a more
convoluted control flow. While the ``match`` version translates into
similar code under the hood, to a reader familiar with patterns it is
much clearer.

Rationale and Goals
===================

Python programs frequently need to handle data which varies in type,
presence of attributes/keys, or number of elements. Typical examples
are operating on nodes of a mixed structure like an AST, handling UI
events of different types, processing structured input (like

> structured files or network messages), or “parsing” arguments for a

Reviewer 2: "Structure" repeated:

```suggestion
files or network messages), or “parsing” arguments for a
```

Reviewer 3: Intentional, given that many files are not structured input but just a stream of bytes

function that can accept different combinations of types and numbers

> of parameters.

Reviewer: In fact, the classic 'visitor' pattern is an example of this, done in an OOP style - but matching makes it much less tedious to write.

Author: I will add that.

Author: ```suggestion
of parameters. In fact, the classic 'visitor' pattern is an example of this,
done in an OOP style - but matching makes it much less tedious to write.
```

Much of the code to do so tends to consist of complex chains of nested

> if/elif statements, including multiple calls to ``len()``,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``if``/``elif`` statements, including multiple calls to ``len()``,
```

``isinstance()`` and index/key/attribute access. Inside those branches

> sometimes we need to destructure the data further to extract the

Reviewer 2: Feels weird dropping into "we" voice right here:

```suggestion
users sometimes need to destructure the data further to extract the
```

> required component values, which may be nested behind several layers
> of objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
required component values, which may be nested several objects deep.
```

Pattern matching as present in many other languages provides an
elegant solution to this problem. These range from statically compiled
functional languages like F# and Haskell, via mixed-paradigm languages
like Scala [4]_ and Rust [3]_, to dynamic languages like Elixir and
Ruby, and is under consideration for JavaScript. We are indebted to
these languages for guiding the way to Pythonic pattern matching, as
Python is indebted to so many other languages for many of its
features: many basic syntactic features were inherited from C,
exceptions from Modula-3, classes were inspired by C++, slicing came
from Icon, regular expressions from Perl, decorators resemble Java
annotations, and so on.

The usual logic for operating on heterogeneous data can be summarized
in the following way:

- Some analysis is done on the *shape* (type and components) of the

>   data: This could involve ``isinstance()`` calls and/or extracting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  data: This could involve ``isinstance()`` or ``len()`` calls and/or extracting
```

  components (via indexing or attribute access) which are checked for
  specific values or conditions.

> - If the shape is as expected, possibly some more components are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the shape is as expected, some more components are possibly
```

    ):
        *value, label = value
        value = tuple(value)
    else:
        label = key.replace('_', ' ').title()

We can see the shape analysis of the ``value`` at the top, following
by the destructuring inside.

Note that shape analysis here involves checking the types both of the
container and of one of its components, and some checks on its number
of elements. Once we match the shape, we need to decompose the
sequence. With the proposal in this PEP, we could rewrite that code
into this::

    match value:
        case [*v, label := (Promise() | str())]:
            value = tuple(v)
        case _:
            label = key.replace('_', ' ').title()

This syntax makes much more explicit which formats are possible for
the input data, and which components are extracted from where. You can
see a pattern similar to list unpacking, but also type checking: the
``Promise()`` pattern is not an object construction, but represents
anything that's an instance of ``Promise``. The pattern operator ``|``
separates alternative patterns (not unlike regular expressions or EBNF
grammars), and ``_`` is a wildcard.

In some occasions, extraction of information is not as relevant as

> identifying structure. Take the following `example
> <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/c4cacc8/Lib/lib2to3/fixer_util.py#L158>`_
> `from the Python standard library

Reviewer 2: Repeated link here:

```suggestion
identifying structure. Take the following example from the 
`Python standard library
```

<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/c4cacc8/Lib/lib2to3/fixer_util.py#L158>`_::

    def is_tuple(node):
        if isinstance(node, Node) and node.children == [LParen(), RParen()]:
            return True
        return (isinstance(node, Node)
                and len(node.children) == 3
                and isinstance(node.children[0], Leaf)
                and isinstance(node.children[1], Node)
                and isinstance(node.children[2], Leaf)
                and node.children[0].value == "("
                and node.children[2].value == ")")

This example shows an example of finding out the "shape" of the data
without doing significant extraction. This code is not very easy to
read, and the intended shape that this is trying to match is not

> evident. Compare with the updated code using this document's syntax::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
evident. Compare with the updated code using the proposed syntax::
```

    def is_tuple(node: Node) -> bool:
        match node:
            case Node(children=[LParen(), RParen()]):
                return True
            case Node(children=[Leaf(value="("), Node(), Leaf(value=")")]):
                return True
            case _:
                return False

Note that the proposed code will work without any modifications to the
definition of ``Node`` and other classes here. As shown in the

> examples above the proposal supports not just unpacking sequences, but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
examples above, the proposal supports not just unpacking sequences, but
```

        case 301 | 302:
            retry(response.location)  # Redirect
        case 401:
            retry(auth=get_credentials())  # Login first
        case 426:
            sleep(DELAY)  # Server is swamped, try after a bit
            retry()
        case _:
            raise RequestError(we couldn't get the data)

Although this will work, it's not necessarily what the proposal is
focused on, and the new syntax has been designed to best support the
destructuring scenarios.

See the `syntax`_ sections below for a more detailed specification.

We propose that destructuring objects can be customized by a new
special ``__match_args__`` attribute. As part of this PEP we specify
the general API and its implementation for some standard library
classes (including named tuples and dataclasses). See the `runtime`_
section below.

Finally, we aim to provide comprehensive support for static type
checkers and similar tools. For this purpose, we propose to introduce
a ``@typing.sealed`` class decorator that will be a no-op at runtime
but will indicate to static tools that all sub-classes of this class
must be defined in the same module. This will allow effective static

> exhaustiveness checks, and together with dataclasses, will provide a
> nice support for algebraic data types [2]_. See the `static checkers`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exhaustiveness checks, and together with dataclasses, will provide
basic support for algebraic data types [2]_. See the `static checkers`_
```
